<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
<head>
	<title>Endnotes</title>
	<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:fiction">
	<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
		<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
		<ol>
			<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>Published at Paris in 1782. <a href="translators-preface.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>A rather distressing Japanese flavor pervades the work throughout. Thus, King Ho Lu masquerades as “Katsuryo,” Wu and Yueh become “Go” and “Etsu,” etc. etc. <a href="translators-preface.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>A notable exception is to be found in Biot's edition of the <i>Chou Li</i>. <a href="translators-preface.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
				<p><i>Shih Chi</i>, ch. 65. <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>Also written 闔閭 (He Lü) Ho Lü. He reigned from 514 to 496 B.C. <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
				<p><i>Shih Chi</i>, ch. 130, f. 6 r°. <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>I note that M. Chavannes translates 民勞 (min lao) “le peuple est épuisé.” But in Sun Tzu's own book (see especially VII §§ 24–26) the ordinary meaning of 民 (min) is “army,” and this, I think, is more suitable here. <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>These words are given also in Wu Tzǔ-hsü's biography, ch. 66, fol. 3 r°<a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>The appellation of 囊瓦 (Nang Wa) Nang Wa. <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
				<p><i>Shih Chi</i>, ch. 31, fol. 6 r°. <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
				<p><i>Shih Chi</i>, ch. 25, fol. 1 r°. <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>The appellation of 狐優 (Hu Yen) Hu Yen, mentioned in ch. 39 under the year 637. <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>王子城父 (Wangzi Chengfu) Wang-tzǔ Ch’êng-fu, ch. 32, year 607. <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>The mistake is natural enough. Native critics refer to the 越絶書 (Yue Jue Shu), a work of the Han dynasty, which says (ch. 2, fol. 3 v° of my edition): 巫門外大家吳王客齊孫武家也去縣十里善為兵法 (Wu men wai da jia Wu wang ke qi Sun Wu jia ye qu xian shi li shan wei bing fa) “Ten <i>li</i> outside the <i>Wu</i> gate [of the city of Wu, now Soochow in Kiangsu] there is a great mound, raised to commemorate the entertainment of Sun Wu of Ch’i, who excelled in the art of war, by the King of Wu.” <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>孫子者吳人也善為兵法辟幽居世人莫知其能. (Sun Zi zhe wu ren ye shan wei bing fa pi you ju shi ren mo zhi qi neng) <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>君臣乖心則孫子不能以應敵. (Jun chen guai xin ze sun zi bu neng yi ying di) <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>孫武以三萬破楚二十萬者楚無法故也 (Sun Wu y san wan po chu er shi wan zhe chu wu fa gu ye) <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>The <i>Shih Chih</i>, on the other hand, says: 矉亦孫武之後世子孫也 (Bin ye Sun Wu zhi hou shi zi sun ye). I remark in passing that the name 武 for one who was a great warrior is just as suspicious as 矉 for a man who had his feet cut off. <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>An allusion to 易經,繫辭 (Yi Jing Xi Ci), II. 2: 弦木為弧剡大為矢弧矢之利以威天下 (Xian mu wei hu shan da wei shi hu shi zhi li yi wei tian xia) “They attached strings to wood to make bows, and sharpened wood to make arrows. The use of bows and arrows is to keep the Empire in awe.” <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>論語 (lun yu) XII. 7. <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>書經 (shu jing) V. iv. 7. <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>易經 (yi jing), 7th diagram (師). (shi)<a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>詩經 (shi jing) III. I. vii. 5. <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>司馬法 (si ma fa) ch. 1 (仁本 (ren ben)) <i>ad init</i>. The text of the passage in the 圖書 (tu shu) <i>T'u Shu</i> (戎政典 (rong zheng dian), ch. 85) is: 是故殺人安人殺之可也. (shi gu sha ren an ren sha zhi ke ye) <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>The son and successor of Ho Lu. He was finally defeated and overthrown by 勾踐 (gou jian) Kou Chien, King of Yüeh, in 473 B.C. See <i>post</i>. <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>King Yen of 徐 (xu) Hsü, a fabulous being, of whom Sun Hsing-yen says in his preface: 仁而敗 (ren er bai) “His humanity brought him to destruction.” See <i>Shih Chi</i>, ch. 5, f. I <i>v</i>°, and M. Chavannes' note, <i>Mémoires Historiques</i>, tom. II, p. 8. <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
				<p><i>T'u Shu</i>, ch. 90: 操聞上古有弧矢之利論語日足兵尚書几政日師易日師真丈人吉詩日王赫斯怒爰征其旅黃帝湯武咸用干戚以濟世也司馬法日人故殺人殺之可也恃武者滅恃文者亡夫差偃王是也聖人之用兵戢而時動不得已而用之. (cao wen shang gu you hu shi zhi li lun yu ri zu bing shang shu ji zheng ri shi yi ri shi zhen zhang ren ji shi ri wang he si nu yuan zheng qi lü huang di tang wu xian yong gan qi yi ji shi ye si ma fa ri ren gu sha ren sha zhi ke ye shi wu zhe mie shi wen she wang fu cha yan wang shi ye sheng ren zhi yong bing ji er shi dong bu de yi er yong zhi)<a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>The passage I have put in brackets is omitted in the <i>T'u Shu</i>, and may be an interpolation. It was known, however, to 張守節 Chang Shou-chieh of the T'ang dynasty, and it appears in the <i>T'ai P'ing Yü Lan</i>. <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>Ts'ao Kung seems to be thinking of the first part of chap. II, perhaps especially of § 8. <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>吾觀兵書戰策多矣孫武所著深孫子者齊人也名武為吳王闔閭作兵法一十三篇試之婦人卒以為將西破強楚入郢北威齊晉後百歲餘有孫矉是武之後也審計重舉明畫深圖不可相誣而但世人未之深亮訓說況文煩富行於世者失其旨要故撰略解焉. <a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
			<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
				<p><a href="translators-intro-1.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			</li>
		</ol>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
