<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Sun Wu and His Book</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="translators-intro-1" epub:type="introduction">
			<h2 epub:type="title"><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span> and His Book</h2>
			<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Chʽien</span> gives the following biography of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span>:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a></p>
			<blockquote>
				<p><span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">孫子武</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ Wu</span> was a native of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span> State. His <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Art of War</i> brought him to the notice of <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">闔盧</span> <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">Ho Lu</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a> King of <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">吳</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu</span> said to him:</p>
				<p>“I have carefully perused your 13 chapters. May I submit your theory of managing soldiers to a slight test?”</p>
				<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> replied: “You may.”</p>
				<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu</span> asked: “May the test be applied to women?”</p>
				<p>The answer was again in the affirmative, so arrangements were made to bring 180 ladies out of the Palace. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> divided them into two companies, and placed one of the King’s favorite concubines at the head of each. He then bade them all take spears in their hands, and addressed them thus: “I presume you know the difference between front and back, right hand and left hand?”</p>
				<p>The girls replied: “Yes.”</p>
				<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> went on: “When I say ‘Eyes front,’ you must look straight ahead. When I say ‘Left turn,’ you must face towards your left hand. When I say ‘Right turn,’ you must face towards your right hand. When I say ‘About turn,’ you must face right round towards your back.”</p>
				<p>Again the girls assented. The words of command having been thus explained, he set up the halberds and battle-axes in order to begin the drill. Then, to the sound of drums, he gave the order “Right turn.” But the girls only burst out laughing. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> said: “If words of command are not clear and distinct, if orders are not thoroughly understood, then the general is to blame.”</p>
				<p>So he started drilling them again, and this time gave the order “Left turn,” whereupon the girls once more burst into fits of laughter. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span>: “If words of command are not clear and distinct, if orders are not thoroughly understood, the general is to blame. But if his orders <em>are</em> clear, and the soldiers nevertheless disobey, then it is the fault of their officers.”</p>
				<p>So saying, he ordered the leaders of the two companies to be beheaded. Now the king of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> was watching the scene from the top of a raised pavilion; and when he saw that his favorite concubines were about to be executed, he was greatly alarmed and hurriedly sent down the following message: “We are now quite satisfied as to our general’s ability to handle troops. If we are bereft of these two concubines, our meat and drink will lose their savor. It is our wish that they shall not be beheaded.”</p>
				<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> replied: “Having once received His Majesty’s commission to be the general of his forces, there are certain commands of His Majesty which, acting in that capacity, I am unable to accept.”</p>
				<p>Accordingly, he had the two leaders beheaded, and straightway installed the pair next in order as leaders in their place. When this had been done, the drum was sounded for the drill once more; and the girls went through all the evolutions, turning to the right or to the left, marching ahead or wheeling back, kneeling or standing, with perfect accuracy and precision, not venturing to utter a sound. Then <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> sent a messenger to the King saying: “Your soldiers, Sire, are now properly drilled and disciplined, and ready for your majesty’s inspection. They can be put to any use that their sovereign may desire; bid them go through fire and water, and they will not disobey.”</p>
				<p>But the King replied: “Let our general cease drilling and return to camp. As for us, We have no wish to come down and inspect the troops.”</p>
				<p>Thereupon <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> said: “The King is only fond of words, and cannot translate them into deeds.”</p>
				<p id="translators-intro-1-p-16">After that, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu</span> saw that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> was one who knew how to handle an army, and finally appointed him general. In the west, he defeated the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span> State and forced his way into <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ying</span>, the capital; to the north he put fear into the States of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chin</span>, and spread his fame abroad amongst the feudal princes. And <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> shared in the might of the King.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>About <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> himself this is all that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Chʽien</span> has to tell us in this chapter. But he proceeds to give a biography of his descendant, <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">孫臏</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Pin</span>, born about a hundred years after his famous ancestor’s death, and also the outstanding military genius of his time. The historian speaks of him too as <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span>, and in his preface we read: <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">孫子臏脚而論兵法</span> “<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> had his feet cut off and yet continued to discuss the art of war.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a> It seems likely, then, that “<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pin</span>” was a nickname bestowed on him after his mutilation, unless the story was invented in order to account for the name. The crowning incident of his career, the crushing defeat of his treacherous rival <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pʽang Chuan</span>, will be found briefly related in <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-292">note 292</a>.</p>
			<p>To return to the elder <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span>. He is mentioned in two other passages of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih Chi</i>:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>In the third year of his reign [512 <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr>] <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu</span>, king of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>, took the field with <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">子胥</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-hsü</span> [<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">伍員</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Yüan</span>] and <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">伯嚭</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Po Pʽei</span>, and attacked <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span>. He captured the town of <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">舒</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu</span> and slew the two prince’s sons who had formerly been generals of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>. He was then meditating a descent on <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">郢</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ying</span> [the capital]; but the general <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span> said: “The army is exhausted.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a> It is not yet possible. We must wait.”⁠ ⁠…<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a> [After further successful fighting,] in the ninth year [506 <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr>], King <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu</span> addressed <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Tzǔ-hsü</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span>, saying: “Formerly, you declared that it was not yet possible for us to enter <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ying</span>. Is the time ripe now?” The two men replied: “<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu’s</span> general <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">子常</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chʽang</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a> is grasping and covetous, and the princes of <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">唐</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽang</span> and <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">蔡</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽai</span> both have a grudge against him. If Your Majesty has resolved to make a grand attack, you must win over <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽang</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽai</span>, and then you may succeed.” <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu</span> followed this advice, [beat <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span> in five pitched battles and marched into <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ying</span>.]<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a></p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>This is the latest date at which anything is recorded of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span>. He does not appear to have survived his patron, who died from the effects of a wound in 496.</p>
			<p>In the chapter entitled <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">律書</span> (the earlier portion of which <abbr>M.</abbr> Chavannes believes to be a fragment of a treatise on Military Weapons), there occurs this passage:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a></p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>From this time onward, a number of famous soldiers arose, one after the other: <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">咎犯</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kao-fan</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a> who was employed by the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chin</span> State; <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang-tzǔ</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-13" id="noteref-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a> in the service of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>; and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span>, in the service of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>. These men developed and threw light upon the principles of war. (<span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">申明軍約</span>).</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>It is obvious enough that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Chʽien</span> at least had no doubt about the reality of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span> as an historical personage; and with one exception, to be noticed presently, he is by far the most important authority on the period in question. It will not be necessary, therefore, to say much of such a work as the <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cmn-Hant">吳越春秋</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Yüeh Chʽun Chʽiu</i>, which is supposed to have been written by <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">趙曄</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chao Yeh</span> of the 1st century <abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr>. The attribution is somewhat doubtful; but even if it were otherwise, his account would be of little value, based as it is on the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih Chi</i> and expanded with romantic details. The story of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> will be found, for what it is worth, in chapter 2. The only new points in it worth noting are: (1) <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> was first recommended to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu</span> by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Tzǔ-hsü</span>. (2) He is called a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a> (3) He had previously lived a retired life, and his contemporaries were unaware of his ability.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a></p>
			<p>The following passage occurs in the <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cmn-Hant">淮南子</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huai-nan Tzǔ</i>: “When sovereign and ministers show perversity of mind, it is impossible even for a <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> to encounter the foe.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a> Assuming that this work is genuine (and hitherto no doubt has been cast upon it), we have here the earliest direct reference for <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span>, for <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huai-nan Tzǔ</span> died in 122 <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr>, many years before the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih Chi</i> was given to the world.</p>
			<p><span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">劉向</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu Hsiang</span> (80⁠–⁠9 <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr>) in his <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">新序</span> says: “The reason why <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> at the head of 30,000 men beat <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span> with 200,000 is that the latter were undisciplined.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a></p>
			<p><span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">鄧名世</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Têng Ming-shih</span> in his <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">姓氏辨證書</span> (completed in 1134) informs us that the surname <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">孫</span> was bestowed on <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu’s</span> grandfather by <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">景公</span> Duke <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ching</span> of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span> (547⁠–⁠490 <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr>). <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu’s</span> father <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun</span> <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">馮</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pʽing</span>, rose to be a Minister of State in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span> himself, whose style was <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">長卿</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽang-chʽing</span>, fled to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> on account of the rebellion which was being fomented by the kindred of <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">田鮑</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽien Pao</span>. He had three sons, of whom the second, named <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">明</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ming</span>, was the father of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Pin</span>. According to this account then, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pin</span> was the grandson of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a> which, considering that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Pin’s</span> victory over <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">魏</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span> was gained in 341 <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr>, may be dismissed as chronologically impossible. Whence these data were obtained by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Têng Ming-shih</span> I do not know, but of course no reliance whatever can be placed in them.</p>
			<p>An interesting document which has survived from the close of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> period is the short preface written by the Great <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">曹操</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Tsʽao</span>, or <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">魏武帝</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Wei Ti</span>, for his edition of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span>. I shall give it in full:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>I have heard that the ancients used bows and arrows to their advantage.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-19" id="noteref-19" epub:type="noteref">19</a> The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lun Yu</i> says: “There must be a sufficiency of military strength.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-20" id="noteref-20" epub:type="noteref">20</a> The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu Ching</i> mentions “the army” among the “eight objects of government.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-21" id="noteref-21" epub:type="noteref">21</a> The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">I Ching</i> says: “<span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">師</span> ‘army’ indicates firmness and justice; the experienced leader will have good fortune.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-22" id="noteref-22" epub:type="noteref">22</a> The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih Ching</i> says: “The King rose majestic in his wrath, and he marshaled his troops.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-23" id="noteref-23" epub:type="noteref">23</a> The Yellow Emperor, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽang</span> the Completer and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang</span> all used spears and battle-axes in order to succor their generation. The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Fa</i> says: “If one man slay another of set purpose, he himself may rightfully be slain.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-24" id="noteref-24" epub:type="noteref">24</a> He who relies solely on warlike measures shall be exterminated; he who relies solely on peaceful measures shall perish. Instances of this are <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Fu Chʽai</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-25" id="noteref-25" epub:type="noteref">25</a> on the one hand and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Wang</span> on the other.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a> In military matters, the Sage’s rule is normally to keep the peace, and to move his forces only when occasion requires. He will not use armed force unless driven to it by necessity.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a></p>
				<p>Many books have I read on the subject of war and fighting; but the work composed by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span> is the profoundest of them all. [<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> was a native of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span> state, his personal name was <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>. He wrote the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Art of War</i> in 13 chapters for <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu</span>, King of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>. Its principles were tested on women, and he was subsequently made a general. He led an army westwards, crushed the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span> state and entered <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ying</span> the capital. In the north, he kept <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chin</span> in awe. A hundred years and more after his time, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Pin</span> lived. He was a descendant of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>].<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a> In his treatment of deliberation and planning, the importance of rapidity in taking the field,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-29" id="noteref-29" epub:type="noteref">29</a> clearness of conception, and depth of design, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> stands beyond the reach of carping criticism. My contemporaries, however, have failed to grasp the full meaning of his instructions, and while putting into practice the smaller details in which his work abounds, they have overlooked its essential purport. That is the motive which has led me to outline a rough explanation of the whole.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-30" id="noteref-30" epub:type="noteref">30</a></p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>One thing to be noticed in the above is the explicit statement that the 13 chapters were specially composed for King <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu</span>. This is supported by the internal evidence of <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#chapter-1-p-20">chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></a> (“The general that hearkens to my counsel⁠ ⁠…”), in which it seems clear that some ruler is addressed.</p>
			<p>In the bibliographic section of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han Shu</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-31" id="noteref-31" epub:type="noteref">31</a> there is an entry which has given rise to much discussion: <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">吳孫子八十二篇圖九卷</span> “The works of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> in 82 <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">pʽien</i> (or chapters), with diagrams in 9 <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chüan</i>.” It is evident that this cannot be merely the 13 chapters known to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Chʽien</span>, or those we possess today. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chang Shou-chieh</span> in his <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">史記正義</span> refers to an edition of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ’s</span> <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">兵法</span> of which the “13 chapters” formed the first <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chüan</i>, adding that there were two other <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chüan</i> besides.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-32" id="noteref-32" epub:type="noteref">32</a> This has brought forth a theory, that the bulk of these 82 chapters consisted of other writings of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span>⁠—we should call them apocryphal⁠—similar to the <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">問答</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wen Ta</i>, of which a specimen dealing with the Nine Situations<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-33" id="noteref-33" epub:type="noteref">33</a> is preserved in the <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">通典</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽung Tien</i>, and another in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Shih’s</span> commentary. It is suggested that before his interview with <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> had only written the 13 chapters, but afterwards composed a sort of exegesis in the form of question and answer between himself and the King. <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">畢以珣</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pi I-hsün</span>, the author of the <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cmn-Hant">孫子敘錄</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ Hsü Lu</i>, backs this up with a quotation from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Yüeh Chʽun Chʽiu</i>: “The King of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> summoned <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span>, and asked him questions about the art of war. Each time he set forth a chapter of his work, the King could not find words enough to praise him.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-34" id="noteref-34" epub:type="noteref">34</a> As he points out, if the whole work was expounded on the same scale as in the above-mentioned fragments, the total number of chapters could not fail to be considerable.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-35" id="noteref-35" epub:type="noteref">35</a> Then the numerous other treatises attributed to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-36" id="noteref-36" epub:type="noteref">36</a> might also be included. The fact that the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han Chih</i> mentions no work of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> except the 82 <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">pʽien</i>, whereas the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sui</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽang</span> bibliographies give the titles of others in addition to the “13 chapters,” is good proof, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pi I-hsün</span> thinks, that all of these were contained in the 82 <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">pʽien</i>. Without pinning our faith to the accuracy of details supplied by the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Yüeh Chʽun Chʽiu</i>, or admitting the genuineness of any of the treatises cited by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pi I-hsün</span>, we may see in this theory a probable solution of the mystery. Between <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Chʽien</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pan Ku</span> there was plenty of time for a luxuriant crop of forgeries to have grown up under the magic name of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span>, and the 82 <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">pʽien</i> may very well represent a collected edition of these lumped together with the original work. It is also possible, though less likely, that some of them existed in the time of the earlier historian and were purposely ignored by him.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-37" id="noteref-37" epub:type="noteref">37</a></p>
			<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tu Mu</span>, after <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Kung</span> the most important commentator on <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span>, composed the preface to his edition<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-38" id="noteref-38" epub:type="noteref">38</a> about the middle of the ninth century. After a somewhat lengthy defence of the military art,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-39" id="noteref-39" epub:type="noteref">39</a> he comes at last to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> himself, and makes one or two very startling assertions:⁠—“The writings of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span>,” he says, “originally comprised several hundred thousand words, but <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Tsʽao</span>, the Emperor <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>, pruned away all redundancies and wrote out the essence of the whole, so as to form a single book in 13 chapters.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-40" id="noteref-40" epub:type="noteref">40</a> He goes on to remark that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Tsʽao’s</span> commentary on <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> leaves a certain proportion of difficulties unexplained.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-41" id="noteref-41" epub:type="noteref">41</a> This, in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tu Mu’s</span> opinion, does not necessarily imply that he was unable to furnish a complete commentary. According to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei Chih</i>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao</span> himself wrote a book on war in something over 100,000 words, known as the <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">新書</span>. It appears to have been of such exceptional merit that he suspects <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao</span> to have used for it the surplus material which he had found in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span>. He concludes, however, by saying: “The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsin Shu</i> is now lost, so that the truth cannot be known for certain.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-42" id="noteref-42" epub:type="noteref">42</a></p>
			<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tu Mu’s</span> conjecture seems to be based on a passage in the <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cmn-Hant">漢官解詁</span> “<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei Wu Ti</span> strung together <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu’s</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Art of War</i>,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-43" id="noteref-43" epub:type="noteref">43</a> which in turn may have resulted from a misunderstanding of the final words of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Kung’s</span> preface: <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">故撰為略解焉</span>. This, as <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Hsing-yen</span> points out,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-44" id="noteref-44" epub:type="noteref">44</a> is only a modest way of saying that he made an explanatory paraphrase,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-45" id="noteref-45" epub:type="noteref">45</a> or in other words, wrote a commentary on it. On the whole, this theory has met with very little acceptance. Thus, the <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cmn-Hant">四庫全書</span> says:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-46" id="noteref-46" epub:type="noteref">46</a> “The mention of the 13 chapters in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih Chi</i> shows that they were in existence before the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han Chih</i>, and that latter accretions are not to be considered part of the original work. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tu Mu’s</span> assertion can certainly not be taken as proof.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-47" id="noteref-47" epub:type="noteref">47</a></p>
			<p id="translators-intro-1-p-34">There is every reason to suppose, then, that the 13 chapters existed in the time of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Chʽien</span> practically as we have them now. That the work was then well known he tells us in so many words: “<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ’s</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">13 Chapters</i> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi’s</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Art of War</i> are the two books that people commonly refer to on the subject of military matters. Both of them are widely distributed, so I will not discuss them here.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-48" id="noteref-48" epub:type="noteref">48</a> But as we go further back, serious difficulties begin to arise. The salient fact which has to be faced is that the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tso Chuan</i>, the greatest contemporary record, makes no mention whatsoever of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span>, either as a general or as a writer. It is natural, in view of this awkward circumstance, that many scholars should not only cast doubt on the story of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span> as given in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih Chi</i>, but even show themselves frankly skeptical as to the existence of the man at all. The most powerful presentment of this side of the case is to be found in the following disposition by <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">葉水心</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yeh Shui-hsin</span>:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-49" id="noteref-49" epub:type="noteref">49</a>⁠—</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>It is stated in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Chʽien’s</span> history that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span> was a native of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span> State, and employed by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>; and that in the reign of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu</span> he crushed <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span>, entered <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ying</span>, and was a great general. But in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tso’s</span> Commentary no <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span> appears at all. It is true that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tso’s</span> Commentary need not contain absolutely everything that other histories contain. But <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tso</span> has not omitted to mention vulgar plebeians and hireling ruffians such as <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ying Kʽao-shu</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-50" id="noteref-50" epub:type="noteref">50</a> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Kuei</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-51" id="noteref-51" epub:type="noteref">51</a> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Chih-wu</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-52" id="noteref-52" epub:type="noteref">52</a> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuan She-chu</span>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-53" id="noteref-53" epub:type="noteref">53</a> In the case of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span>, whose fame and achievements were so brilliant, the omission is much more glaring. Again, details are given, in their due order, about his contemporaries <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Yüan</span> and the Minister <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pʽei</span>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-54" id="noteref-54" epub:type="noteref">54</a> Is it credible that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span> alone should have been passed over?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-55" id="noteref-55" epub:type="noteref">55</a></p>
				<p>In point of literary style, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ’s</span> work belongs to the same school as <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kuan Tzǔ</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-56" id="noteref-56" epub:type="noteref">56</a> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu Tʽao</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-57" id="noteref-57" epub:type="noteref">57</a> and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh Yü</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-58" id="noteref-58" epub:type="noteref">58</a> and may have been the production of some private scholar living towards the end of the “Spring and Autumn” or the beginning of the “Warring States” period.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-59" id="noteref-59" epub:type="noteref">59</a> The story that his precepts were actually applied by the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> State, is merely the outcome of big talk on the part of his followers.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-60" id="noteref-60" epub:type="noteref">60</a></p>
				<p>From the flourishing period of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span> dynasty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-61" id="noteref-61" epub:type="noteref">61</a> down to the time of the “Spring and Autumn,” all military commanders were statesmen as well, and the class of professional generals, for conducting external campaigns, did not then exist. It was not until the period of the “Six States”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-62" id="noteref-62" epub:type="noteref">62</a> that this custom changed. Now although <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> was an uncivilized State, is it conceivable that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tso</span> should have left unrecorded the fact that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span> was a great general and yet held no civil office? What we are told, therefore, about <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jang-chu</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-63" id="noteref-63" epub:type="noteref">63</a> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span>, is not authentic matter, but the reckless fabrication of theorizing pundits. The story of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lü’s</span> experiment on the women, in particular, is utterly preposterous and incredible.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-64" id="noteref-64" epub:type="noteref">64</a></p>
			</blockquote>
			<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yeh Shui-hsin</span> represents <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Chʽien</span> as having said that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span> crushed <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span> and entered <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ying</span>. This is not quite correct. No doubt the impression left on the reader’s mind is that he at least shared in these exploits; but the subject of the verbs <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">破</span>, <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">入</span>, <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">威</span> and <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">顯</span> is certainly <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">闔廬</span>, as shown by the next words: <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">孫子與有力焉</span>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-65" id="noteref-65" epub:type="noteref">65</a> The fact may or may not be significant; but it is nowhere explicitly stated in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih Chi</i> either that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> was general on the occasion of the taking of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ying</span>, or that he even went there at all. Moreover, as we know that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüan</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Po Pʽei</span> both took part in the expedition, and also that its success was largely due to the dash and enterprise of <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">夫㮣</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Fu Kai</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu’s</span> younger brother, it is not easy to see how yet another general could have played a very prominent part in the same campaign.</p>
			<p><span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">陳振孫</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽên Chên-sun</span> of the Sung dynasty has the note:⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-66" id="noteref-66" epub:type="noteref">66</a></p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Military writers look upon <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span> as the father of their art. But the fact that he does not appear in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tso Chuan</i>, although he is said to have served under <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lü</span> King of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>, makes it uncertain what period he really belonged to.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-67" id="noteref-67" epub:type="noteref">67</a></p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">He also says:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>The works of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span> may be of genuine antiquity.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-68" id="noteref-68" epub:type="noteref">68</a></p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>It is noticeable that both <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yeh Shui-hsin</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽên Chên-sun</span>, while rejecting the personality of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span> as he figures in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Chʽien’s</span> history, are inclined to accept the date traditionally assigned to the work which passes under his name. The author of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsü Lu</i> fails to appreciate this distinction, and consequently his bitter attack on <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽên Chên-sun</span> really misses its mark. He makes one of two points, however, which certainly tell in favor of the high antiquity of our “13 chapters.” “<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span>,” he says, “must have lived in the age of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ching Wang</span> [519⁠–⁠476], because he is frequently plagiarized in subsequent works of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> dynasties.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-69" id="noteref-69" epub:type="noteref">69</a> The two most shameless offenders in this respect are <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Chʽi</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huai-nan Tzǔ</span>, both of them important historical personages in their day. The former lived only a century after the alleged date of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span>, and his death is known to have taken place in 381 <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr>. It was to him, according to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu Hsiang</span>, that <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">曾申</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsêng Shên</span> delivered the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tso Chuan</i>, which had been entrusted to him by its author.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-70" id="noteref-70" epub:type="noteref">70</a> Now the fact that quotations from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Art of War</i>, acknowledged or otherwise, are to be found in so many authors of different epochs, establishes a very strong anterior to them all⁠—in other words, that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ’s</span> treatise was already in existence towards the end of the 5th century <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr>. Further proof of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ’s</span> antiquity is furnished by the archaic or wholly obsolete meanings attaching to a number of the words he uses. A list of these, which might perhaps be extended, is given in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsü Lu</i>; and though some of the interpretations are doubtful, the main argument is hardly affected thereby.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-71" id="noteref-71" epub:type="noteref">71</a> Again, it must not be forgotten that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yeh Shui-hsin</span>, a scholar and critic of the first rank, deliberately pronounces the style of the 13 chapters to belong to the early part of the fifth century. Seeing that he is actually engaged in an attempt to disprove the existence of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span> himself, we may be sure that he would not have hesitated to assign the work to a later date had he not honestly believed the contrary. And it is precisely on such a point that the judgment of an educated Chinaman will carry most weight. Other internal evidence is not far to seek. Thus in <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#chapter-13-p-1">chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span></a> (“Raising a host of a hundred thousand men⁠ ⁠…”), there is an unmistakable allusion to the ancient system of land-tenure which had already passed away by the time of Mencius, who was anxious to see it revived in a modified form.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-72" id="noteref-72" epub:type="noteref">72</a> The only warfare <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> knows is that carried on between the various feudal princes (<span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">諸侯</span>), in which armored chariots play a large part. Their use seems to have entirely died out before the end of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span> dynasty. He speaks as a man of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>, a state which ceased to exist as early as 473 <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr>. On this I shall touch presently.</p>
			<p>But once refer the work to the 5th century or earlier, and the chances of its being other than a bonâ fide production are sensibly diminished. The great age of forgeries did not come until long after. That it should have been forged in the period immediately following 473 is particularly unlikely, for no one, as a rule, hastens to identify himself with a lost cause. As for <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yeh Shui-hsin’s</span> theory, that the author was a literary recluse,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-73" id="noteref-73" epub:type="noteref">73</a> that seems to me quite untenable. If one thing is more apparent than another after reading the maxims of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span>, it is that their essence has been distilled from a large store of personal observation and experience. They reflect the mind not only of a born strategist, gifted with a rare faculty of generalization, but also of a practical soldier closely acquainted with the military conditions of his time. To say nothing of the fact that these sayings have been accepted and endorsed by all the greatest captains of Chinese history, they offer a combination of freshness and sincerity, acuteness and common sense, which quite excludes the idea that they were artificially concocted in the study. If we admit, then, that the 13 chapters were the genuine production of a military man living towards the end of the “<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽun Chʽiu</span>” period, are we not bound, in spite of the silence of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tso Chuan</i>, to accept <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Chʽien’s</span> account in its entirety? In view of his high repute as a sober historian, must we not hesitate to assume that the records he drew upon for <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu’s</span> biography were false and untrustworthy? The answer, I fear, must be in the negative. There is still one grave, if not fatal, objection to the chronology involved in the story as told in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih Chi</i>, which, so far as I am aware, nobody has yet pointed out. There are two passages in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> in which he alludes to contemporary affairs. The first is in <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#chapter-6-p-21" epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</a>:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Though according to my estimate the soldiers of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh</span> exceed our own in number, that shall advantage them nothing in the matter of victory. I say then that victory can be achieved.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">The other is in <a href="chapter-11.xhtml#chapter-11-p-30" epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</a>:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Asked if an army can be made to imitate the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">shuai-jan</i>, I should answer, Yes. For the men of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> and the men of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh</span> are enemies; yet if they are crossing a river in the same boat and are caught by a storm, they will come to each other’s assistance just as the left hand helps the right.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>These two paragraphs are extremely valuable as evidence of the date of composition. They assign the work to the period of the struggle between <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh</span>. So much has been observed by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pi I-hsün</span>. But what has hitherto escaped notice is that they also seriously impair the credibility of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Chʽien’s</span> narrative. As we have seen above, the first positive date given in connection with <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span> is 512 <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr>. He is then spoken of as a general, acting as confidential adviser to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu</span>, so that his alleged introduction to that monarch had already taken place, and of course the 13 chapters must have been written earlier still. But at that time, and for several years after, down to the capture of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ying</span> in 506, <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">楚</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span> and not <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh</span>, was the great hereditary enemy of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>. The two states, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>, had been constantly at war for over half a century,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-74" id="noteref-74" epub:type="noteref">74</a> whereas the first war between <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh</span> was waged only in 510,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-75" id="noteref-75" epub:type="noteref">75</a> and even then was no more than a short interlude sandwiched in the midst of the fierce struggle with <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span>. Now <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span> is not mentioned in the 13 chapters at all. The natural inference is that they were written at a time when <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh</span> had become the prime antagonist of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>, that is, after <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span> had suffered the great humiliation of 506. At this point, a table of dates may be found useful.</p>
			<table>
				<thead>
					<tr>
						<th>
							<abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr>
						</th>
						<th/>
					</tr>
				</thead>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td>514</td>
						<td>Accession of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu</span>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>512</td>
						<td><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu</span> attacks <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span>, but is dissuaded from entering <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">郢</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ying</span>, the capital. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih Chi</i> mentions <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span> as general.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>511</td>
						<td>Another attack on <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>510</td>
						<td><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> makes a successful attack on <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh</span>. This is the first war between the two states.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>509<br/>
						or<br/>
						508</td>
						<td><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span> invades <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>, but is signally defeated at <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">豫章</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yü-chang</span>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>506</td>
						<td><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu</span> attacks <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span> with the aid of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽang</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽai</span>. Decisive battle of <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">柏舉</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Po-chü</span>, and capture of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ying</span>. Last mention of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span> in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih Chi</i>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>505</td>
						<td><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh</span> makes a raid on <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> in the absence of its army. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> is beaten by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span> and evacuates <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ying</span>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>504</td>
						<td><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu</span> sends <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">夫差</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Fu Chʽai</span> to attack <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>497</td>
						<td><span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">勾踐</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kou Chien</span> becomes King of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh</span>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>496</td>
						<td><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> attacks <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh</span>, but is defeated by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kou Chien</span> at <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">檇李</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsui-li</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu</span> is killed.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>494</td>
						<td><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Fu Chʽai</span> defeats <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kou Chien</span> in the great battle of <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">夫椒</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Fu-chiao</span>, and enters the capital of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh</span>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>485<br/>
						or<br/>
						484</td>
						<td><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kou Chien</span> renders homage to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>. Death of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Tzǔ-hsü</span>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>482</td>
						<td><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kou Chien</span> invades <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> in the absence of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Fu Chʽai</span>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>478<br/>
						to<br/>
						476</td>
						<td>Further attacks by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh</span> on <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>475</td>
						<td><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kou Chien</span> lays siege to the capital of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>473</td>
						<td>Final defeat and extinction of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>.</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p>The sentence quoted above from <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#chapter-6-p-21">chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span></a> hardly strikes me as one that could have been written in the full flush of victory. It seems rather to imply that, for the moment at least, the tide had turned against <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>, and that she was getting the worst of the struggle. Hence we may conclude that our treatise was not in existence in 505, before which date <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh</span> does not appear to have scored any notable success against <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu</span> died in 496, so that if the book was written for him, it must have been during the period 505⁠–⁠496, when there was a lull in the hostilities, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> having presumably exhausted by its supreme effort against <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span>. On the other hand, if we choose to disregard the tradition connecting <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu’s</span> name with <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu</span>, it might equally well have seen the light between 496 and 494, or possibly in the period 482⁠–⁠473, when <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh</span> was once again becoming a very serious menace.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-76" id="noteref-76" epub:type="noteref">76</a> We may feel fairly certain that the author, whoever he may have been, was not a man of any great eminence in his own day. On this point the negative testimony of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tso Chuan</i> far outweighs any shred of authority still attaching to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih Chi</i>, if once its other facts are discredited. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Hsing-yen</span>, however, makes a feeble attempt to explain the omission of his name from the great commentary. It was <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Tzǔ-hsü</span>, he says, who got all the credit of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu’s</span> exploits, because the latter (being an alien) was not rewarded with an office in the State.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-77" id="noteref-77" epub:type="noteref">77</a></p>
			<p>How then did the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> legend originate? It may be that the growing celebrity of the book imparted by degrees a kind of factitious renown to its author. It was felt to be only right and proper that one so well versed in the science of war should have solid achievements to his credit as well. Now the capture of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ying</span> was undoubtedly the greatest feat of arms in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu’s</span> reign; it made a deep and lasting impression on all the surrounding states, and raised <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> to the short-lived zenith of her power. Hence, what more natural, as time went on, than that the acknowledged master of strategy, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span>, should be popularly identified with that campaign, at first perhaps only in the sense that his brain conceived and planned it; afterwards, that it was actually carried out by him in conjunction with <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Yüan</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-78" id="noteref-78" epub:type="noteref">78</a> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Po Pʽei</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Fu Kai</span>?</p>
			<p>It is obvious that any attempt to reconstruct even the outline of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ’s</span> life must be based almost wholly on conjecture. With this necessary proviso, I should say that he probably entered the service of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> about the time of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu’s</span> accession, and gathered experience, though only in the capacity of a subordinate officer, during the intense military activity which marked the first half of the prince’s reign.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-79" id="noteref-79" epub:type="noteref">79</a> If he rose to be a general at all, he certainly was never on an equal footing with the three above mentioned. He was doubtless present at the investment and occupation of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ying</span>, and witnessed <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu’s</span> sudden collapse in the following year. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh’s</span> attack at this critical juncture, when her rival was embarrassed on every side, seems to have convinced him that this upstart kingdom was the great enemy against whom every effort would henceforth have to be directed. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span> was thus a well-seasoned warrior when he sat down to write his famous book, which according to my reckoning must have appeared towards the end, rather than the beginning of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Lu’s</span> reign. The story of the women may possibly have grown out of some real incident occurring about the same time. As we hear no more of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span> after this from any source, he is hardly likely to have survived his patron or to have taken part in the death-struggle with <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh</span>, which began with the disaster at <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsui-li</span>.</p>
			<p>If these inferences are approximately correct, there is a certain irony in the fate which decreed that China’s most illustrious man of peace should be contemporary with her greatest writer on war.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
