<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Commentators</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="translators-intro-3" epub:type="introduction">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Commentators</h2>
			<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> can boast an exceptionally long distinguished roll of commentators, which would do honor to any classic. <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">歐陽修</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ou-yang Hsiu</span> remarks on this fact, though he wrote before the tale was complete, and rather ingeniously explains it by saying that the artifices of war, being inexhaustible, must therefore be susceptible of treatment in a great variety of ways.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-93" id="noteref-93" epub:type="noteref">93</a></p>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">曹操</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Tsʽao</span> or <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">曹公</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Kung</span>, afterwards known as <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">魏武帝</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei Wu Ti</span> (<abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 155⁠–⁠220). There is hardly any room for doubt that the earliest commentary on <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> actually came from the pen of this extraordinary man, whose biography in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">San Kuo Chih</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-94" id="noteref-94" epub:type="noteref">94</a> reads like a romance. One of the greatest military geniuses that the world has seen, and Napoleonic in the scale of his operations, he was especially famed for the marvelous rapidity of his marches, which has found expression in the line <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">說曹操曹操就到</span> “Talk of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Tsʽao</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Tsʽao</span> will appear.” <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ou-yang Hsiu</span> says of him that he was a great captain who “measured his strength against <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tung Cho</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lü Pu</span> and the two <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüan</span>, father and son, and vanquished them all; whereupon he divided the Empire of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> with <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu</span>, and made himself king. It is recorded that whenever a council of war was held by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span> on the eve of a far-reaching campaign, he had all his calculations ready; those generals who made use of them did not lose one battle in ten; those who ran counter to them in any particular saw their armies incontinently beaten and put to flight.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-95" id="noteref-95" epub:type="noteref">95</a> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Kung’s</span> notes on <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span>, models of austere brevity, are so thoroughly characteristic of the stern commander known to history, that it is hard indeed to conceive of them as the work of a mere littérateur. Sometimes, indeed, owing to extreme compression, they are scarcely intelligible and stand no less in need of a commentary than the text itself.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-96" id="noteref-96" epub:type="noteref">96</a> As we have seen, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Kung</span> is the reputed author of the <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cmn-Hant">新書</span>, a book of war in 100,000 odd words, now lost, but mentioned in the <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cmn-Hant">魏志</span>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-97" id="noteref-97" epub:type="noteref">97</a></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">孟氏</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mêng Shih</span>. The commentary which has come down to us under this name is comparatively meager, and nothing about the author is known. Even his personal name has not been recorded. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi Tʽien-pao’s</span> edition places him after <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chia Lin</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽao Kung-wu</span> also assigns him to the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽang</span> dynasty,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-98" id="noteref-98" epub:type="noteref">98</a> but this is a mistake, as his work is mentioned in the <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cmn-Hant">隋書經籍志</span>. In <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Hsing-yen’s</span> preface, he appears as <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mêng Shih</span> of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liang</span> dynasty (502⁠–⁠557). Others would identify him with<span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">孟康</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mêng Kʽang</span> of the 3rd century. In the <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cmn-Hant">宋史藝文志</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-99" id="noteref-99" epub:type="noteref">99</a> he is named in one work as the last of the <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">五家</span> “Five Commentators,” the others being <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei Wu Ti</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Lang-wadegile">Tu Mu</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽên Hao</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chia Lin</span>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">李筌</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li Chʽüan</span> of the 8th century was a well-known writer on military tactics. His <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cmn-Hant">太白陰經</span> has been in constant use down to the present day. The <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cmn-Hant">通志</span> mentions <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cmn-Hant">閫外春秋</span> (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">lives of famous generals from the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span> to the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽang</span> dynasty</i>) as written by him.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-100" id="noteref-100" epub:type="noteref">100</a> He is also generally supposed to be the real author of the popular Taoist tract, the <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cmn-Hant">陰符經</span>. According to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽao Kung-wu</span> and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tʽien-i-ko</i> catalogue,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-101" id="noteref-101" epub:type="noteref">101</a> he followed the <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">太乙遁甲</span> text of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> which differs considerably from those now extant. His notes are mostly short and to the point, and he frequently illustrates his remarks by anecdotes from Chinese history.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">杜佑</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tu Yu</span> (died 812) did not publish a separate commentary on <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span>, his notes being taken from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽung Tien</i>, the encyclopedic treatise on the Constitution which was his lifework. They are largely repetitions of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Kung</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mêng Shih</span>, besides which it is believed that he drew on the ancient commentaries of <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">王凌</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Ling</span> and others. Owing to the peculiar arrangement of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽung Tien</i>, he has to explain each passage on its merits, apart from the context, and sometimes his own explanation does not agree with that of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Kung</span>, whom he always quotes first. Though not strictly to be reckoned as one of the “Ten Commentators,” he was added to their number by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi Tʽien-pao</span>, being wrongly placed after his grandson <span xml:lang="zh-Lang-wadegile">Tu Mu</span>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">杜牧</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Lang-wadegile">Tu Mu</span> (803⁠–⁠852) is perhaps the best known as a poet⁠—a bright star even in the glorious galaxy of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽang</span> period. We learn from <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽao Kung-wu</span> that although he had no practical experience of war, he was extremely fond of discussing the subject, and was moreover well read in the military history of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽun Chʽiu</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chan Kuo</i> eras.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-102" id="noteref-102" epub:type="noteref">102</a> His notes, therefore, are well worth attention. They are very copious, and replete with historical parallels. The gist of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ’s</span> work is thus summarized by him: “Practice benevolence and justice, but on the other hand make full use of artifice and measures of expediency.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-103" id="noteref-103" epub:type="noteref">103</a> He further declared that all the military triumphs and disasters of the thousand years which had elapsed since <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu’s</span> death would, upon examination, be found to uphold and corroborate, in every particular, the maxims contained in his book.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-104" id="noteref-104" epub:type="noteref">104</a> <span xml:lang="zh-Lang-wadegile">Tu Mu’s</span> somewhat spiteful charge against <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Kung</span> has already been considered elsewhere.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">陳暭</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽên Hao</span> appears to have been a contemporary of <span xml:lang="zh-Lang-wadegile">Tu Mu</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽao Kung-wu</span> says that he was impelled to write a new commentary on <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> because <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Kung’s</span> on the one hand was too obscure and subtle, and that of <span xml:lang="zh-Lang-wadegile">Tu Mu</span> on the other too long-winded and diffuse.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-105" id="noteref-105" epub:type="noteref">105</a> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ou-yang Hsiu</span>, writing in the middle of the 11th century, calls <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Kung</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Lang-wadegile">Tu Mu</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽên Hao</span> the three chief commentators on <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> (<span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">三家</span>), and observes that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽên Hao</span> is continually attacking <span xml:lang="zh-Lang-wadegile">Tu Mu’s</span> shortcomings. His commentary, though not lacking in merit, must rank below those of his predecessors.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">賈林</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chia Lin</span> is known to have lived under the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽang</span> dynasty, for his commentary on <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> is mentioned in the <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cmn-Hant">唐書</span> and was afterwards republished by <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">紀燮</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi Hsieh</span> of the same dynasty together with those of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mêng Shih</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tu Yu</span>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-106" id="noteref-106" epub:type="noteref">106</a> It is of somewhat scanty texture, and in point of quality, too, perhaps the least valuable of the eleven.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">梅堯臣</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mei Yao-chʽên</span> (1002⁠–⁠1060), commonly known by his “style” as <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mei</span> <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">聖兪</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shêng-yü</span>, was, like <span xml:lang="zh-Lang-wadegile">Tu Mu</span>, a poet of distinction. His commentary was published with a laudatory preface by the great <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ou-yang Hsiu</span>, from which we may cull the following:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>Later scholars have misread <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span>, distorting his words and trying to make them square with their own one-sided views. Thus, though commentators have not been lacking, only a few have proved equal to the task. My friend <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shêng-yü</span> has not fallen into this mistake. In attempting to provide a critical commentary for <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ’s</span> work, he does not lose sight of the fact that these sayings were intended for states engaged in internecine warfare; that the author is not concerned with the military conditions prevailing under the sovereigns of the three ancient dynasties,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-107" id="noteref-107" epub:type="noteref">107</a> nor with the nine punitive measures prescribed to the Minister of War.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-108" id="noteref-108" epub:type="noteref">108</a> Again, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span> loved brevity of diction, but his meaning is always deep. Whether the subject be marching an army, or handling soldiers, or estimating the enemy, or controlling the forces of victory, it is always systematically treated; the sayings are bound together in strict logical sequence, though this has been obscured by commentators who have probably failed to grasp their meaning. In his own commentary, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mei Shêng-yü</span> has brushed aside all the obstinate prejudices of these critics, and has tried to bring out the true meaning of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> himself. In this way, the clouds of confusion have been dispersed and the sayings made clear. I am convinced that the present work deserves to be handed down side by side with the three great commentaries; and for a great deal that they find in the sayings, coming generations will have constant reason to thank my friend <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shêng-yü</span>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-109" id="noteref-109" epub:type="noteref">109</a></p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Making some allowance for the exuberance of friendship, I am inclined to endorse this favourable judgment, and would certainly place him above <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽên Hao</span> in order of merit.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">王皙</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Hsi</span>, also of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sung</span> dynasty, is decidedly original in some of his interpretations, but much less judicious than <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mei Yao-chʽên</span>, and on the whole not a very trustworthy guide. He is fond of comparing his own commentary with that of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Kung</span>, but the comparison is not often flattering to him. We learn from <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽao Kung-wu</span> that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Hsi</span> revised the ancient text of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span>, filling up lacunae and correcting mistakes.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-110" id="noteref-110" epub:type="noteref">110</a></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">何延錫</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen-hsi</span> of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sung</span> dynasty. The personal name of this commentator is given as above by <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">鄭樵</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chêng Chʽiao</span> in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽung Chih</i>, written about the middle of the twelfth century, but he appears simply as <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">何氏</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Shih</span> in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yu Hai</i>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ma Tuan-lin</span> quotes <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽao Kung-wu</span> as saying that his personal name is unknown. There seems to be no reason to doubt <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chêng Chʽiao’s</span> statement, otherwise I should have been inclined to hazard a guess and identify him with one <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">何去非</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Chʽü-fei</span>, the author of a short treatise on war entitled <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cmn-Hant">備論</span>, who lived in the latter part of the 11th century.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-111" id="noteref-111" epub:type="noteref">111</a> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Shih’s</span> commentary, in the words of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽien-i-ko</i> catalogue, <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">有所裨益</span> “contains helpful additions” here and there, but is chiefly remarkable for the copious extracts taken, in adapted form, from the dynastic histories and other sources.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">張預</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chang Yü</span>. The list closes with a commentator of no great originality perhaps, but gifted with admirable powers of lucid exposition. His commentary is based on that of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Kung</span>, whose terse sentences he contrives to expand and develop in masterly fashion. Without <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chang Yü</span>, it is safe to say that much of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Kung’s</span> commentary would have remained cloaked in its pristine obscurity and therefore valueless. His work is not mentioned in the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sung</span> history, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽung Kʽao</i>, or the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yu Hai</i>, but it finds a niche in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽung Chih</i>, which also names him as the author of the <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cmn-Hant">百將傳</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives of Famous Generals</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-112" id="noteref-112" epub:type="noteref">112</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
			<p>It is rather remarkable that the last-named four should all have flourished within so short a space of time. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽao Kung-wu</span> accounts for it by saying: “During the early years of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sung</span> dynasty the Empire enjoyed a long spell of peace, and men ceased to practice the art of war. But when [<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chao</span>] <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüan-hao’s</span> rebellion came [1038⁠–⁠42] and the frontier generals were defeated time after time, the Court made strenuous inquiry for men skilled in war, and military topics became the vogue amongst all the high officials. Hence it is that the commentators of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> in our dynasty belong mainly to that period.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-113" id="noteref-113" epub:type="noteref">113</a></p>
			<p>Besides these eleven commentators, there are several others whose work has not come down to us. The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sui Shu</i> mentions four, namely <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">王凌</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Ling</span> (often quoted by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tu Yu</span> as <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">王子</span>); <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">張子尚</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chang Tzǔ-shang</span>; <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">賈詡</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chia Hsü</span> of <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">魏</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-114" id="noteref-114" epub:type="noteref">114</a> and <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">沈友</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shên Yu</span> of <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">吳</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>. The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽang Shu</i> adds <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">孫鎬</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Hao</span>, and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽung Chih</i> <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">蕭吉</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsiao Chi</span>, while the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽu Shu</i> mentions a <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ming</span> commentator, <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">黃潤玉</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huang Jun-yü</span>. It is possible that some of these may have been merely collectors and editors of other commentaries, like <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi Tʽien-pao</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi Hsieh</span>, mentioned above. Certainly in the case of the latter, the entry <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">紀燮注孫子</span> in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽung Kʽao</i>, without the following note, would give one to understand that he had written an independent commentary of his own.</p>
			<p>There are two works, described in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssu Kʽu Chʽüan Shu</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-115" id="noteref-115" epub:type="noteref">115</a> and no doubt extremely rare, which I should much like to have seen. One is entitled <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cmn-Hant">孫子參同</span>, in 5 <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chüan</i>. It gives selections from four new commentators, probably of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ming</span> dynasty, as well as from the eleven known to us. The names of the four are <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">解元</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsieh Yüan</span>; <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">張鏊</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chang Ao</span>; <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">李村</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li Tsʽai</span>; and <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">黃治徵</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huang Chih-chêng</span>. The other work is <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">孫子彙徵</span> in 4 <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chüan</i>, compiled by <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">鄭端</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chêng Tuan</span> of the present dynasty. It is a compendium of information on ancient warfare, with special reference to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ’s</span> 13 chapters.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
