<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Text of Sun Tzǔ</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="translators-intro-2" epub:type="introduction">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Text of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span></h2>
			<p>I have found it difficult to glean much about the history of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ’s</span> text. The quotations that occur in early authors go to show that the “13 chapters” of which <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Chʽien</span> speaks were essentially the same as those now extant. We have his word for it that they were widely circulated in his day, and can only regret that he refrained from discussing them on that account.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-80" id="noteref-80" epub:type="noteref">80</a> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Hsing-yen</span> says in his preface:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>During the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> dynasties <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ’s</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Art of War</i> was in general use amongst military commanders, but they seem to have treated it as a work of mysterious import, and were unwilling to expound it for the benefit of posterity. Thus it came about that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei Wu</span> was the first to write a commentary on it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-81" id="noteref-81" epub:type="noteref">81</a></p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>As we have already seen, there is no reasonable ground to suppose that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Kung</span> tampered with the text. But the text itself is often so obscure, and the number of editions which appeared from that time onward so great, especially during the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽang</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sung</span> dynasties, that it would be surprising if numerous corruptions had not managed to creep in. Towards the middle of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sung</span> period, by which time all the chief commentaries on <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> were in existence, a certain <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">吉天保</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi Tʽien-pao</span> published a work in 15 <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chüan</i> entitled <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cmn-Hant">十家孫子會注</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> with the collected commentaries of ten writers</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-82" id="noteref-82" epub:type="noteref">82</a> There was another text, with variant readings put forward by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Fu</span> of <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">大興</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ta-hsing</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-83" id="noteref-83" epub:type="noteref">83</a> which also had supporters among the scholars of that period; but in the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ming</span> editions, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Hsing-yen</span> tells us, these readings were for some reason or other no longer put into circulation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-84" id="noteref-84" epub:type="noteref">84</a> Thus, until the end of the 18th century, the text in sole possession of the field was one derived from <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi Tʽien-pao’s</span> edition, although no actual copy of that important work was known to have survived. That, therefore, is the text of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> which appears in the War section of the great Imperial encyclopedia printed in 1726, the <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cmn-Hant">古今圖書集成</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ku Chin Tʽu Shu Chi Chʽêng</i>. Another copy at my disposal of what is practically the same text, with slight variations, is that contained in the <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cmn-Hant">周秦十一子</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eleven philosophers of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span> dynasties</i> (1758). And the Chinese printed in <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Calthrop’s first edition is evidently a similar version which has filtered through Japanese channels. So things remained until <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">孫星衍</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Hsing-yen</span> (1752⁠–⁠1818), a distinguished antiquarian and classical scholar,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-85" id="noteref-85" epub:type="noteref">85</a> who claimed to be an actual descendant of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Wu</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-86" id="noteref-86" epub:type="noteref">86</a> accidentally discovered a copy of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi Tʽien-pao’s</span> long-lost work, when on a visit to the library of the <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">華陰</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hua-yin</span> temple.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-87" id="noteref-87" epub:type="noteref">87</a> Appended to it was the <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cmn-Hant">遺說</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">I Shuo</i> of <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">鄭友賢</span><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chêng Yu-hsien</span>, mentioned in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽung Chih</i>, and also believed to have perished.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-88" id="noteref-88" epub:type="noteref">88</a> This is what <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Hsing-yen</span> designates as the <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">古本</span> or <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">原本</span> “original edition (or text)”⁠—a rather misleading name, for it cannot by any means claim to set before us the text of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> in its pristine purity. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi Tʽien-pao</span> was a careless compiler,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-89" id="noteref-89" epub:type="noteref">89</a> and appears to have been content to reproduce the somewhat debased version current in his day, without troubling to collate it with the earliest editions then available. Fortunately, two versions of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span>, even older than the newly discovered work, were still extant, one buried in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽung Tien</i>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tu Yu’s</span> great treatise on the Constitution, the other similarly enshrined in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽai Pʽing Yü Lan</i> encyclopedia. In both the complete text is to be found, though split up into fragments, intermixed with other matter, and scattered piecemeal over a number of different sections. Considering that the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yü Lan</i> takes us back to the year 983, and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽung Tien</i> about 200 years further still, to the middle of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽang</span> dynasty, the value of these early transcripts of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> can hardly be overestimated. Yet the idea of utilizing them does not seem to have occurred to anyone until <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Hsing-yen</span>, acting under Government instructions, undertook a thorough recension of the text. This is his own account:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Because of the numerous mistakes in the text of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> which his editors had handed down, the Government ordered that the ancient edition [of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi Tʽien-pao</span>] should be used, and that the text should be revised and corrected throughout. It happened that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Nien-hu</span>, the Governor <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pi Kua</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsi</span>, a graduate of the second degree, had all devoted themselves to this study, probably surpassing me therein. Accordingly, I have had the whole work cut on blocks as a textbook for military men.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-90" id="noteref-90" epub:type="noteref">90</a></p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The three individuals here referred to had evidently been occupied on the text of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> prior to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Hsing-yen’s</span> commission, but we are left in doubt as to the work they really accomplished. At any rate, the new edition, when ultimately produced, appeared in the names of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Hsing-yen</span> and only one co-editor <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">吳人驥</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu Jên-shi</span>. They took the “original edition” as their basis, and by careful comparison with older versions, as well as the extant commentaries and other sources of information such as the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">I Shuo</i>, succeeded in restoring a very large number of doubtful passages, and turned out, on the whole, what must be accepted as the closest approximation we are ever likely to get to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ’s</span> original work. This is what will hereafter be denominated the “standard text.”</p>
			<p>The copy which I have used belongs to a reissue dated 1877. It is in 6 <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">pên</i>, forming part of a well-printed set of 23 early philosophical works in 83 <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">pên</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-91" id="noteref-91" epub:type="noteref">91</a> It opens with a preface by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Hsing-yen</span> (largely quoted in this introduction), vindicating the traditional view of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ’s</span> life and performances, and summing up in remarkably concise fashion the evidence in its favor. This is followed by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Kung’s</span> preface to his edition, and the biography of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ</span> from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih Chi</i>, both translated above. Then come, firstly, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chêng Yu-hsien’s</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">I Shuo</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-92" id="noteref-92" epub:type="noteref">92</a> with author’s preface, and next, a short miscellany of historical and bibliographical information entitled <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="cmn-Hant">孫子敘錄</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Tzǔ Hsü Lu</i>, compiled by <span xml:lang="cmn-Hant">畢以珣</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pi I-hsün</span>. As regards the body of the work, each separate sentence is followed by a note on the text, if required, and then by the various commentaries appertaining to it, arranged in chronological order. These we shall now proceed to discuss briefly, one by one.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
